Update privacy and security landing pages (#27268)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/privacy/index.md

---
title: Privacy on the web
slug: Web/Privacy
---

People use websites for several important tasks such as banking, shopping, entertainment, and paying their taxes. In doing so, they are required to share personal information with those sites. Users place a certain level of trust in the sites they share their data with — if that information fell into the wrong hands it could be used to exploit users, for example by profiling them, targetting them with unwanted ads, or even stealing their identity or money.

> Modern browsers already have a wealth of features to protect users' privacy on the web, but that's not enough. To create a trustworthy, privacy-respecting experience, developers need to educate their users in good practices (and enforce them) and create sites that collect as little data as possible, use it responsibly, and transport and store it securely.

Author: One of Dipika's edits already improved this paragraph, so I think we are all good here.

> In this article, we define privacy and important related terms, examine browser features that automatically protect user privacy, and look at what users can do to create privacy-respecting web content that minimizes the risk of users' personal information/data being obtained unexpectedly by third parties.

Reviewer: nit pick: this is also a bit long, would it make sense to break it down to bullet points?

Author: Yes, good idea. I've broken this into bullets in the next commit.

> ## Privacy defined

Author: I've decided to do with "Defining privacy terms and concepts"

Before we look at the various privacy and security features available to use on the web, let's define some important terms.

> ### What is privacy?

Author: I've gone with "Privacy and its relationship with security"

It is hard to talk about privacy without also talking about security — they are closely related, and you can't really create privacy-respecting websites without good security. Therefore, we shall define both.

> - **Privacy** refers to the act of giving users the right to control how their data is collected, stored, and used, and not using it irresponsibly. For example, developers should make it very clear to users of their sites what data they are collecting, who else it will be shared with, and what they will use it for. Users must be given a chance to consent to your terms of data usage, and also be able to see what items of their data you have stored, and delete them if they no longer wish you to have them. You must also comply with your own terms — nothing erodes user trust like having their data used in ways — and shared with third parties — that they didn't agree to. And this isn't just ethically wrong — it could be against the law. Many parts of the world now have legislation that protect consumer privacy rights (for example the EU's [GDPR](https://gdpr.eu/)).

Author: I've done a lot of updates here, but in a slightly different way.

> - **Security** is the act of keeping private data and systems protected against unauthorized access. This includes both company (internal) data, and user and partner (external) data. It is no use having a robust privacy policy that causes your users to trust you, if your security is weak and malicious parties can steal their data anyway.

Author: Updated

Modern browsers take steps to help prevent fingerprinting-based attacks by either not allowing information to be accessed or, where the information must be made available, by introducing variations that prevent it from being used for identification purposes.

For example, if a website queries a user's browser for the elapsed time, a comparison of that time to the time as reported by the server might be useful as a factor in fingerprinting. Because of this, browsers typically introduce a small amount of variability to timers in order to make them less useful for identifying the user's system. We'll look at other browser privacy-enhancing technologies in the section below.

> **Note:** See also [Fingerprinting](https://web.dev/learn/privacy/fingerprinting/) over on web.dev for additional useful information.

> ## What do browsers do automatically?

Author: Changed

Browsers are all moving towards requiring HTTPS by default; this is practically the case already, as you can't do much without it.

Related topics are as follows:

- [Certificate Transparency](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Certificate_Transparency)
  - : An open standard for monitoring and auditing certificates, creating a database of public logs that can be used to help identify incorrect or malicious certificates.
- [HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS)](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security)
  - : HSTS is used by servers to let them protect themselves from protocol downgrade and cookie hijack attacks by letting sites tell clients that they can only use HTTPS to communicate with the server.
- [HTTP/2](/en-US/docs/Glossary/HTTP_2)
  - : While HTTP/2 technically does not <em>have</em> to use encryption, most browser developers are only supporting it when used with HTTPS, so it can be thought of in that regard as being security/privacy enhancing.

### Opt-in for "powerful features"

> So-called "powerful" web API features that provide access to potentially sensitive data and operations are available only in [secure contexts](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Secure_Contexts), which basically means HTTP-only. Not only that, but they are gated behind a system of user permissions, so users have to explicitly opt-in to features like notifications, geolocation data, making the browser go into fullscreen mode, accessing media streams from web cams, web payments, etc.

Reviewer: do you mean HTTPS-only?

Author: This already got fixed, I think by one of your later suggestions. So all good here.

> So-called "powerful" web API features that provide access to potentially sensitive data and operations are available only in [secure contexts](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Secure_Contexts), which basically means HTTP-only. Not only that, but they are gated behind a system of user permissions, so users have to explicitly opt-in to features like notifications, geolocation data, making the browser go into fullscreen mode, accessing media streams from web cams, web payments, etc.

Author: updated

This provides further security and privacy protection.

### Anti-tracking technology

Browsers have implemented several anti-tracking features that automatically enhance their users' privacy protection. Many of these block or limit the ability of third-party sites embedded in {{htmlelement("iframe")}}s to access cookies set on the top-level domain, run tracking scripts, etc.

> For example, one change that was agreed upon and rolled out across all browsers was an update to the {{httpheader("Set-Cookie")}} header [`SameSite`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie#samesitesamesite-value) attribute default value to `Lax` (see [Changes to the default behavior without SameSite](https://web.dev/samesite-cookies-explained/#changes-to-the-default-behavior-without-samesite)).

Author: done

- [State partitioning](/en-US/docs/Web/Privacy/State_Partitioning)
  - : A reworking of how Firefox manages client-side state (i.e., data stored in the browser) to mitigate the ability of websites to abuse state for cross-site tracking. This is achieved by providing what is effectively a "different", isolated storage location to every website a user visits.
- [Storage access policy](/en-US/docs/Web/Privacy/Storage_Access_Policy)
  - : A storage access policy that blocks cookies and other site data from third-party tracking resources. This policy is designed as an alternative to the older cookie policies available in Firefox for many years. See also our [Storage Access Policy Errors reference](/en-US/docs/Web/Privacy/Storage_Access_Policy/Errors).
- [Total cookie protection](https://blog.mozilla.org/products/firefox/firefox-rolls-out-total-cookie-protection-by-default-to-all-users-worldwide/)
  - : Firefox gives third-party cookies a separate cookie jar per site, so they can't be tracked across sites

#### Chrome anti-tracking features

> The [privacy sandbox project](https://developer.chrome.com/en/docs/privacy-sandbox/) is a series of proposals to satisfy cross-site use cases without requiring third-party cookies or other tracking mechanisms. Themes include identity and tracking protection, more privacy-respecting ad solutions, preventing covert tracking, and safely sharing data across browsing contexts.

Author: This isn't really accurate, as most of these features aren't in Chrome yet. Instead I've put "Google's privacy sandbox project..."

  - : Also known as **partitioned cookies**, CHIPs allows developers to opt a cookie into partitioned storage, with a separate cookie jar per top-level site.
- [First-party sets](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/privacy-sandbox/first-party-sets/)
  - : A machanism for a company to declare relationships between different origins. Supporting browsers will then allow limited third-party cookie access across those origins for specific purposes.
- Third party cookie default
  - : Chrome does not yet block third-party cookies by default, but this can be set by users in Settings.

#### Safari anti-tracking features

- [Intelligent Tracking Prevention](https://webkit.org/blog/9521/intelligent-tracking-prevention-2-3/)
  - : Multiple privacy enhancements in the Safari browser to prevent tracking.

#### Edge anti-tracking features

- [Tracking prevention](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/web-platform/tracking-prevention)
  - : Edge blocks trackers from unvisited sites; in addition, known harmful trackers are blocked by default.
- Third party cookie default
  - : Edge does not yet block third-party cookies by default, but this can be set by users in Settings.

> ## What does a developer need to do?

Author: updated

There are several actions web developers can and should take to improve privacy for their users. The below sections discuss the most important ones. Some of the categories are not purely technical tasks as such but will involve collaboration with other team members.

> ## Collect data ethically

Author: As discussed before, I'd prefer these to be H2s, so that they show up in the right hand nav.

Companies collect lots of different data from their users for a variety of different reasons:

- Usernames, passwords, emails, etc. for authentication purposes.
- Emails, postal addresses, and phone numbers for communication.
- Age, gender, geographical location, favorite pastimes, and a host of other PII for anything from site personalization to customer satisfaction surveys.
- Browsing habits on their sites and other sites, to measure page and feature success metrics.
- And so, so much more.

When collecting data from your customers, you have an opportunity to behave with integrity, show them that you are trustworthy, and build a great relationship with them, in turn, improving your brand and your chance of success.

The ethics of data collection can be broken down into three simple principles:

1. Don't collect more data than you need
2. Communicate clearly how you are going to use it

> 3. Delete the data once you have finished with it

Author: Titles and bullets updated

> 3. Delete the data once you have finished with it

Reviewer 2: Thank you

> **Note:** The tips provided below make for a better, more privacy-aware user experience, but many of them are required by law to comply with regulations, for example the [GDPR](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN) in the EU. You should make sure to find out what regulations apply to you in your locale, and what you need to do to compley with them.

> ### Don't collect more data than you need

Reviewer 2: This and the next two might need to be changed to H4
```suggestion
#### Don't collect more data than you need
```

Author: As discussed previously, no.

It is tempting to ask for a lot of data because you think it might be useful in future. However, every bit of extra data you collect adds risk to your customer's privacy, and increases the chance that they will abandon the step they are taking (whether it is filling out a survey, or signing up for a service).

It is good to anonymize data, and you should also consider whether you can get what you need by making your data request less granular. As an example, instead of asking a user what their favourite products are, you could ask them to select between more general categories.

The best way to protect their privacy though, is to not collect data at all — returning to the previous example, you could infer the same data by looking at user purchase history. As another example, users really appreciate being able to buy products anonymously. You shouldn't force them to sign up for an account; it should be their choice.

### Communicate clearly how you are going to use it

Once you have decided what data you are going to collect, you should publish a privacy policy on your site that clearly states:

> - What data you are collecting.
> - What you are going to use it for.
> - Who you tend to share it with, if anyone, and an declaration that you will ask for user consent before sharing.
> - How long you will keep the data for before it is deleted.
> - How the user is able to view the data you have collected from them, and delete it if they want to.

Reviewer 2: I would reword these a bit differently - to remove the question word from the beginning

```suggestion
- Data that you collect
- Ways in which you use the data
- Parties with whom you tend to share the data, if at all, and a declaration that you will ask for user consent before sharing
- Duration for which you keep the data for before it is deleted
- Ways in which users can view the data you have collected from them and a way for them to delete it if they want to
```
